So what we're gonna do now is I wanted to
cover options API cuz this is where most
people are starting from when
they've heard of you and seen it.
But now it's time for
us to talk about composition API.
And this is honestly where the bulk of
the workshop is gonna be moving towards
because while options API is certainly
valid and it works with everything and
I can't stress that enough.
Options API is a valid approach to writing
your components a lot of examples and
a lot of the ways things
are being used these days have
some element of composition API.
And so it's kind of unavoidable
to learn the fundamentals of it.
So basically, we're gonna opt into it just
to show you what it's like in its full
form, so
that people can get some practice with it.
Because one of the reasons why
composition API even came into being is
because while options API.
I think its greatest claim to same from
my experience is that when I taught
an introductory view workshop, there was
a designer who hadn't coded for years.
And in fact primarily focused on
HTML CSS barely any JavaScript, but
within an hour she was able to get up and
running with YouTube.
Because the options API provided her with
very specific guidelines on how things
were supposed to be built, right?
Cuz one of the problems with freedom
sometimes is there's no guardrails and
it can be confusing when people
architect things a certain way.
However, with the guard rails that
means there are constraints and
sometimes you want to organize things
the way you want to organize them,
you might wanna use more native
JavaScript features whatnot.
So the composition API was the answer to
that, so what I'm gonna do now is I'm
gonna switch these now, so
we're gonna go back to the zoo example.
So now we're on branch 02 begin and
we'll be updating the exercise branch and
preparation for everybody, all right?
So let's make sure we have our to do
app up and running so let's refresh,
there you go.
Natural server built beautiful,
all right, there we go,
we have our to do list viewer.
Okay, so composition API,
how does this differ from options API?
Well, first thing first is we're gonna
basically get rid of a lot of the way
it's being defined right now.
So first thing first,
this whole export default object.
This just disappears,
this goes by all of that disappears.
And so the next thing we need to do though
is we need to actually then basically tell
us that we're using composition API.
And the way this is typically done is
with the setup life cycle hooks, so
actually let me undo this real
quick just to demonstrate this.
If you ever see anything inside of setup
method like this Instead of your options
API, this is where you know
composition API is being sprinkled in.
Because basically what you need to know
about composition API is that everything
in here, from all these comments, all
these lines, they're vanilla JavaScript.
In other words, they don't come
with any Vue magic by default.
Whereas when we're looking at
options API stuff here, right,
with methods,
you see we can refer to this.
And then computed then there's also
global imports you get with routes and so
there's a lot of magic that again
it's not everyone's cup of tea.
But it's there it's been helpful for
some situations but
when we want to configure everything
ourselves composition API is the answer.
So what we're gonna do is because when
an authentic pure composition API,
we're gonna use what is known
as the script setup block.
And so what you're essentially doing
is telling the script block and
the compiler that we're gonna
just skip that as an API and
we're only gonna work with in the setup.
So let me just actually I'm
just gonna comment this out,
so that it doesn't yell at us.
And so let's go ahead and
map over the various things, shall we?
The first thing first is the photo
gallery, so typically you might be like
okay, well what I might do is I'll
do let photoGallery = an array.
And that'll do the trick, right, but
this again is vanilla JavaScript.
So we need to do is tell it that hey
we actually wanna make it a reactive
reference something that view will
track for us, and how do we do that?
We Import ref from view, that's all you do
and once you import that you can actually
wrap your value with the ref so you
passing like basically the starting value.
And that will be basically what's
set as the reactive reference, so
that is the equivalent of what
we just did here with data.
Next, we have some computed properties,
right, so let's go ahead do that.
So the computed property here,
I'll just make those conts.
So we have here const number of photos,
okay?
So again, right now we have a function
that returns this property,
but this doesn't exist anymore,
because we're no longer in the basically
the confines of options API.
Okay, so what we need to do first is let's
start by importing our computed helper
method, because this is how
we tell JavaScript, hey,
we actually want this to
be a computed property.
All right, there we go, but
then remember, this doesn't exist,
especially with the arrow function because
the arrow function resets to this context.
So what do we do?
Well, you might think, okay, yeah, photo
gallery, this This should be good, right?
But we have to remember that photo
gallery is not just an array.
It's not a variable that
can just point to and
get the value of because reactive
references in view need to be unpacked.
Without diving into proxies and
stuff, just know that it's a way for
you have to actually manually tell it,
I wanna get something out of it.
And there's something nice
about this syntax, right?
So basically the way we do that, as we
said, we wanna get the value out of it.
And so this is how you say, okay, I want
the length of the photo gallery value.
And let's go ahead and now do that for
the rest of them for even an odd.
So let me just copy this one here.
And then we'll do const even albums equals
computed and then just like this and
then reset save what we solve
a problem because this does not exist.
So reset that to .value and
then that's looking good.
And then once again, let's go and
just clone this cuz this will
be easier than me copying that.
We have the odd albums and then we're
gonna wrap this inside of that negation.
And then all we have
left now are the methods.
And so the methods,
if we think about what methods really are,
they're really just JavaScript functions.
So let's take this fetch photo gallery,
and
that can delete now all this boiler code.
And we're just gonna define
it just like we would
normally in a JavaScript function.
Just give it the prefix function or
it can use an aeros inax
whichever one you prefer.
And then basically what you have now
Is you have everything basically,
being automatically return to your
template as you would expect.
Because we skipped the step of
like showing you composition API
within options.
But never use composition
API within the options API.
You actually need to return
explicitly what you wanna use.
But one of the things that you get as
a benefit of using script setup is there's
a bunch of compiler optimizations.
And so
it basically automatically knows like for
example you'll notice here is this
a number of photo is declared never
used because it actually knows
that inside of the template.
It's going through basically
all the reactive references and
being like it doesn't exist.
And that's true because,
what did I say about one off errors?
I forgot the s that's why
it's actually breaking.
So I just need to add the s here and
then I forgot I just need to
replace this value with .value.
And this here is our equivalent of what we
did with options API in composition API.
You have a question?
>> Yeah, although it might be
an unnecessarily digression-
>> No, go for it.
>> So I see you're using
the ref helper function,
I know-
>> Yeah.
>> Sometimes you can also use Reactive for
non-primitives.
Is there a particular rule of
thumb around that I notice this?
>> No, that's a great question.
So when it comes to reactive references,
as we just explained, there's ref here.
But as artfully pointed out,
there's actually something else
called a reactive helper method.
And so it's worth clarifying here.
So let's say we have another let's say
that we have like a new photo objects.
All right, you could technically
just do a ref with an object.
But what you might see in some code bases
as well is the reactive helper method.
And the key difference with this is
that let's say we just have id 1, 2,
3 title, best photo ever.
So the difference with these two
things is let's go ahead and
actually let me copy this and just for
now, just for the sake of comparison,
these two things are let's say,
best photo ever to, okay?
So when you refer to these
properties in the ref,
we said that you actually
need to unpack it.
So if I wanna refer to
the title of the photo gallery,
it'd be photoGallery.value.title,
that's what you'd have to do.
But in every active object,
you actually can just go a newPhoto.title.
Now some of you might be interested going,
that's the one for me, I wanna type less.
And that's totally fine, right?
And that's exactly how I felt.
But as I mentioned before
the beginning of this workshop,
like decisions in our code
bases are all about trade offs.
One of the things that was aptly pointed
out to me is that a library author
preferred ref.
And the reason for that is because it made
it very clear when you use a dot value,
that it was a reactive
reference being utilized.
Because otherwise, if you just see like a
new photo, that title being randomly like,
again, our code is short enough
that you can make the connections.
But once it's long, you're just sort
of like, okay, new photo.title,
guess I assume it's reactive or
is it a lead?
Is it a constant so technically,
it does provide it that's off the skate
that declarative nature a little bit.
So again,
is there one is better than the other?
I say whatever your team prefers.
For now, we'll be using REST though
because I think this is the one that
people tend to shoot themselves
in the foot with it.
Because it's easy to
forget to unpack it and
when you don't unpack
it then things break.
So we just want to give you.
So at least as far as the examples I'll
be showing you, I just want to show you
the rough example because react
if you just decide to use it.
It'll feel really natural like
you normally use the desktop for
example it'll feel really natural for
those of you who are used to that